A WAY OF LIFE  The original name for the community of Jesus’ followers (or as I call them, apprentices) was “the Way” or “followers of the Way (Acts 9:2; 19:23; 24:14). In this word picture is a simple but revolutionary idea: 
 The Way of Jesus is not just a theology (a set of ideas that we believe in our heads). It is that, but it’s more. 
 And it’s not just ethics (a list of dos and don’ts that we obey or disobey). It is that, but it’s still more. 
 It’s exactly what it sounds like—a way of life. 
 This way of life—modeled personally by Jesus himself is far beyond anything else on offer in this world. It can open you up to God’s presence and power in ways most people only dream. But it requires you to follow a path marked out for you by Jesus himself. 
 Jesus said, “Enter through the narrow gate. For wide is the gate and broad is the road [way] that leads to de­struction, and many enter through it. But small is the gate and narrow the road [way] that leads to life, and only a few find it” (Matthew 7:13-14). 
 The “broad” way is that of the majority culture, which is as simple as it is crass: “Follow the crowd and do whatever you want.” Billions of people live this way, but it does not lead them to life; instead, it often leads to destruction. 
 The Way of Jesus is “narrow,” meaning, it is a very specific way to live. And if you follow it, it will lead you to life, both in this age and the age to come. 
 Jesus was constantly offering this life to any who would follow him. “I have come that they may have life, and have it to the full,” he said (John 10:10). This life Jesus is referring to he also called “eternal life,” which describes not just quantity but quality of life. 
 It seems that it’s almost always a minority who say yes to Jesus’ invitation. But you can be one of the lucky few—an apprentice of Jesus. 
 Because this staggering offer of life is available to all. 
 If you were to start looking at following Jesus as a way of life, how might that begin to change your life? What habits would you need to change? Take a moment now to pause, breathe, and get in touch with your heart’s desire for Jesus and transformation. Let that desire fuel your change.